The one who has not been very naughty in his childhood he cannot be peaceful. That is why I believe that the children who are very simple are not children. A kid should be such, that he makes life difficult for his parents, teachers. I was just like that. Once in school life, it happened that I had a fight with a boy, and then I took 15-20 friends and gave him a royal beating. So, you can say organized hooliganism, for the first time, I did it in the 7th-8th grade. The most difficult thing for men is how to refrain
from laughing on someone's sorrow. That's why if someone dies somewhere, you see what is the behavior of the men and women there. When women go, there are many women sitting there, are talk casually, one more woman comes in, everyone cries together. It exactly works like an orchestra. So, those women who are sitting peacefully and talking, how do all the women
start crying due to one woman, I couldn't understand. Because how can they have such a control
over their emotions? Well, you see men there, keeping the hand for 1-2 minutes, A very bad thing happened. Feeling very bad. The, 6-7 men will sit there, for 2-4 minutes, will look down, and get serious. Then will start gossiping. Things going well at the workplace? The biggest issue with men is that, their upbringing teaches them that crying is a sign of weakness. Vikas Divyakirti's
Hindi TRS episode has come. Whether you are UPSC aspirant, whether you are UPSC failure, whether you are UPSC success, or whether you just like
spiritual conversations, deep conversations. If you are a lifelong learner, friends, another TRS All-Star has come. We have to record
many episodes with Vikas, sir. But this is our
first epic conversation, friends. Enjoy it. He is a modern-day philosopher. Namaskar. Lots of love to you. Lots of love to Vikas Divyakirti. And lots of love to the Lord. Namaste. 🎶[Music]🎶 🎶[Music]🎶 🎶[Music]🎶 Vikas Sir, welcome to this studio. Welcome to TRS. Thank you very much. Feeling very good just to be sitting in front of you. I feel just as good. I have seen you on YouTube many times. I wanted to talk to you sometime. So, I am happy to be with you. Thank you, Sir. I got this gift from a Tibetan monk. This is a bell and with that gave a Vajra. This bell means, he said, this bell means, wisdom. Means knowledge, means Saraswati. I think we call
experienced knowledge as wisdom. And this Vajra means compassion. It means knowing other people's emotions. I pick this bell
very rarely in this podcast. But today I will pick it up at the start of this podcast. Thank you. Thank you. When wisdom meets compassion. Thank you. Very few people have this skill. To make wisdom meet compassion. To also know other people's hearts and also to teach other people things. Through experience. People sit very peacefully and listen to you. So, it is a very raw question. But why? According to you, why? If we are talking about students, surprisingly, my view behind it is I have been a very bad student
in my student life. Very bad means, had not been good. Maybe, was not very bad. So, when you sit on the very last bench in student life. Do all the mischief. You are not very serious
about your studies. Your parents worry a lot about you whether he will be able to do
something or not. And then when you get interested
in studying, so, while teaching, I automatically understand what the child sitting at the very back, may not be understanding. Because I have lived that phase
for a long time. So, maybe I have an ability to understand what he or she needs. To start talking from there. Then my parents got me into debating
since childhood on the school stage. So, in front of 2,000 students, I used to do a lot of debates
in school time. I used to recite poetry. The experience I kept getting, then in the university life, I did a lot of debating. I mean, I did a lot of stage activities. I think those activities taught me the way of speaking. To laugh and joke has been my childhood habit, nature. So, the confidence to speak, the ability to laugh and joke, understanding the dilemmas in the mind of the weakest child, and then in the end, my self-religion, which is stated in the Gita, you will only do best in things, which is religion to you. I think my self-religion is actually to learn and teach. So, when I teach, I feel like I am into a spiritual experience. This year the paper was the toughest paper -I heard.
-Yes, the prelims that happened recently a few days back. Results came out. Yes, results came out. Do you get to know during coaching that who all will get success and who all will not get success? You get the idea. It is exactly the same as you get an idea during the podcast, which one will work and how much. It is something like that. A level of intuition comes in while doing any task for a long time. So, you get to understand who has the potential to get through. You get an idea. Congrats to everyone who succeeded. But those who did not get success, first we address their heart. You address. The prelims paper this time, the 2023 one, we can call
it the most difficult paper so far. I have been seeing prelims
for 20-25 years. It was the most difficult paper. But you need to be mindful of one thing. There are two papers. You may have an idea. One is of the General Studies. On the basis of which merit is made. There is a CSAT on basis of which, have to just qualify. The General Studies' paper was very difficult. This time instead of some conceptual, they added more factual elements. And there is no need to worry in it, because in General Studies, see like 10 lakh people fill the form, 6 lakh people give exams. Approximately 5-6 lakh people. In between 12-15,000 qualify the prelims. No matter how difficult the paper is, only 15,000 will qualify or 14,000. So, what will ultimately happen,
if the paper is difficult? The cutoff will be less. The top 14,000 have to qualify the prelim stage. That is why, there is pain that it is a difficult paper. But ultimately, 14,000 have to qualify. It may be that the more questions
came from one segment. There was more than one, very difficult. So, those who had more command in it, they got into advantage. Those who had less command in it, they got into disadvantage. But generally, 14,000 have to get selected in the prelims. What CSAT is, that qualifying. We have to score one-third, 33% marks in that paper. It includes math, there is reasoning and there is comprehension. UPSC for the past 3-4 years has not only been increasing
the mathematics portion which is fine, but it should be in ratio, Earlier, it was like out of 80 questions, it used to be approximately one-third, one-third, one-third. Comprehension, reasoning, math. So, even if a student is not very good in math, he or she can manage with the help of reasoning and comprehension because 27 questions are to be corrected. So, UPSC has increased
the proportion of math by a bit. By gradual increments, it came close to 40 questions out of 80. People even manage that somehow. Because there are still 40 questions. Kids do some questions for math as well. This time, the math questions which came, many kids from IIT have told me, who have been selected, they said, they we were stunned
after looking at the paper. Many kids who are B.Tech from IIT, have not cleared the CSAT. Such level of math questions. Some questions that come in CAT exam, exactly those questions have been asked. Some kids filed a petition in CAT, In the Central Administrative Tribunal. But the result has come. So, this difference that has come this time, many such kids who have been selected in this, I mean, got selected in IPS, in IRS, and they were trying to improve
their rank. It is very surprising. I know about 50 such people who gave the exam again, after becoming an IRS, IPS. Out of them, at least 30-35 didn't take the prelims this time. But ultimately, the prelims got conducted, of 14,000 people So, people whose math was good, probably didn't have much idea
of the rest, they got through. So, competition in Mains reduced a little this time. What should happen, UPSC… I don't know what is their approach, what is the understanding. Prelims exam is a screening test. You will make it so difficult that many worthy people will get finished there itself. So difficult, and difficult also in those things, which doesn't have much link
with career in UPSC. A basic level of data interpretation, data sufficiency, basic math, percentage, average, proportion, can understand, should know. Should no statistical tools, can understand. But now, in the name of number system, you will ask calculus level questions, which is meaningless to his career. And even if it is, one can easily learn in training. So, I think, in the policy
of those preparing the paper, either there is a mistake
of understanding, or maybe it was accidental this time, maybe it will be fixed next time. Someone has gone through a breakup, someone is going through that pain, and is passing on that pain to students through a difficult paper. Yes, can happen. This can happen. I often say that actually there are very few people who are able to detach and work. Like if in my life, like take your example, you had a breakup a few days ago, as you told. Now, there can be two things in your mind. As much as I understand you, there will be a different thing
in your mind, -but I'm saying it to explain.
-Sure. Some people get into this mindset that, if it has happened with me, then no one can love in this world. If anyone does, I will feel jealous, I will feel the pain. This is that situation when I want my sorrow to become the sorrow of every person. And in the matter of happiness, they want the opposite, that everyone's happiness
becomes my happiness, and my sorrow becomes everyone's sorrow. The meaning of being a grown up person is that when there is sorrow, he tolerates alone, when there is happiness, share it. I broke up, but no one else should. And I should not be the reason. One is, this approach. Be it any exam of UPSC, To many examiners I have-- Because I am in the world of teaching, I have even taught in DU for some time. I know people from academics. There are only a few people who can get out of their own frustration. Many people live with this frustration throughout their lives that what I could not do, how will someone else do? And this is sadism, to create sorrow in everyone's life and enjoy it. I think the most profound training in academics or education should be on how to make a proper human being. And without being sadistic, It is better if we get used to finding our own happiness in the happiness of others. Training on empathy. Training on empathy. Which probably happened in our gurukuls. I am not very sure, I have no idea what its curriculum. But empathy training is also done at home. If parents' understanding is correct, on how parenting should be, then they teach empathy at home too. If grandfather and grandmother are at home and tell their children
to press their feet every night, now this can be probably seen in the West, as child labor or child exploitation. But in my opinion, a child learns two things from this. One he learns humility and the other, learns empathy. If my grandfather's legs are in pain and I am pressing his feet, then one is,
I am spending half an hour with him. Secondly, I am understanding, that my duty is not only to enjoy life, but to serve is also a part of my life. And if I do not share their pain, then who will? And a humility-- Like I am a teacher, many children touch my feet, I do not feel good, I refuse them. But irrespectively-- Irrespective of this, I believe that touching the feet is a very important step in itself, especially for children. They should have the habit of bending. And bending the feet, we symbolically believe that the most respect
you can give a person, is given by touching the feet. And parents getting so much respect that my child appreciates me, is at least thankful, has gratitude. This emotional bonding is empathy. And emotional intelligence concept came in the West 20-25 years ago, but it has been going on
in the past since long. When Buddha was saying that only compassion is what connects the world. When Bhavbhuti in Uttar Ramcharitmanas 'Eko Ras Karun', he says, there is only emotion in the world, that is the emotion of compassion, It is not that the training on empathy will not only come from the West. Empathy so many times in the past. Valmiki the first poet of our world, why did become a poet the first time? A pair of cranes was playing. A hunter killed one bird, now in love, one of the birds fell down, That very moment, in that moment, the first poet of the world, has became a poet. Must have felt so much pain and grief. He wrote, 'Ma Nisada Pratishtam Tvam Gamah Sasvatih Samah' it is a line in Sanskrit from where the Ramayana begins. On the same thing, a poet from Chhayavad, Chhayavad is 1918 to 1936, In that a poet wrote, The first poet may have been separated, the song would have arisen from a sigh silently coming out of the eyes, a poem would have flown unknown. The first poem may have come out of a sigh and would have flown from the eyes, A poem is never written, a poem flows through the eyes and flows through the tongue. Kalidasa wrote the Meghaduta. Meghaduta has Yaksha and Yakshini. It is the story of their love, story of separation. But there is a poet, Nagarjuna, who wrote on Kalidasa, and said... There comes a line. On the peaks of Amal-Dhaval Giri Beloved, how long did you sleep Kalidasa, tell the truth, Did Yaksha cried or was it you who cried? Yaksha did not cry, tears that are flowing from Yaksha's eyes, Kalidasa, those are your tears. And the poet Nagarjuna, is saying, I recognize that these tears are yours. In being a poem and a writer, it does happen so. And this things is fine, not being empathetic, ultimately the most fun of being a human is in emotions. And if you cannot connect emotionally with others, and connecting means standing with them in their grief. I hope those paper setters are listening to this podcast. So that next year, an easy paper comes out. I mean, even with easy paper, the selections will be the same. -It won't make any difference.
-Even then. The only difference being, the CSAT paper, because that is for qualifying. You disqualify a very good student for a very minor reason. This is a bit disturbing thing. But let us address
the failures a little, sir. A lot of people… I will tell them only this, that the CSAT paper this time, if your math is very bad, then next year, just be mindful, that first of all, only attempt questions on comprehension, Secondly attempt questions on reasoning, Practice how to attempt
these questions first. And in any case, 35 questions are always asked. -Yes.
-Out of 80. So, if you can do 31 questions out of 35, right, you are through. And it is not that difficult. To the extent out of 35 questions, even if you do 30 right. And even if you skip
the rest of the 45 questions, you will still qualify. And those who consider
this as their last attempt, what would you like to tell them? I would say either learn math, if there is a lot of difficulty in math, then practice
a lot in reasoning and comprehension. Practice so much that, because what happens is, 80 questions have to be done in 120 minutes, so you have 1.5 minutes per question. But if you decide that you will attempt only 40 questions, then you have 3 minutes per question. So you get a chance to spend 3 minutes in every question. And only to those two segments, Do only 40 questions. When you have to only qualify, you are to do only 27 questions. What happens is that, those who have picked the math questions this time for the first time, I was told by an IIT student The average works out to be 8 minutes per question this time, that they are solving. It is such a difficult paper. Now the question paper demands, each question to be done in 1.5 minutes. The level of your question is that of 8 minutes. So the one who gets entangled in math, he generally gets stranded. So I will suggest through your podcast, Solve the questions on comprehension and reasoning first selectively
in a jiffy, in 1.5 hours, do 40 questions. After that, do the questions on math which they know. And if you can attempt 40-45 questions, it's fine. If you were a paper setter, or not even paper setter, if you could head the entire UPSC, what changes would you bring in the entire system, sir? In the entire system. I am sure this is something you have thought about at some point. I think almost every day about this. Because, first of all, UPSC is a really great institution. There is no issue of ifs and buts in this. You know that you are the country's very big influencer of this domain. -I know.
-So, what you say… I am saying this with a lot of thought. And I am also aware that in a movement of 2014, I spoke very strongly against UPSC through a lot of TV channel. I said that UPSC is not a divine institution. I am firm on my words. It is not divine. But it is true that UPSC is one of the best institutions of the country. Because what happens is, when you run the system, the problems are different. Criticizing the system is very easy. Since I am running an institution of my own, we are 1,500 people working in Drishti. We run the institution together. What happens is, criticizing is such an easy job. You will find some loophole and criticize. And running the system in such a way that doesn't have a single loophole is a very difficult task. So even I empathize with the members of UPSC as well, then I want to say that generally they try to keep things right. Except sometimes some of their members have such opinions with which we cannot agree. For example, between 2008 and 2014, there were many drastic changes in UPSC. Which I still believe to be not right. Many changes in them were directly against Indian languages. It should not be. There should be a level playing field. Be it any language, be it is English, Hindi, Marathi or Tamil, why should anyone be at a loss? A kid from a city, from a village, why should anyone be at a loss? But when you induce such things, which directly harms someone, then the question arises that this is a wrong approach of yours. So UPSC in general is a good institution. This is the starting point. The thing about mathematics
sitting in their mind and the phobia in the minds of kids, should avoid that a bit. As much math as required after UPSC. How much math does an IAS need. Why should he get
so deep questions about math. He should know enough, to make and understand tables and graph. Is able to do calculations. Is able to check
some report based on calculations. His calculations should also be fast, can understand to this point. Be able to do data interpretation. Be able to see data sufficiency, data man-- not manipulation, but is able to do data analysis. Ask for all this. But intentionally making it so difficult that only those people can do, whose math is very deep, there is no need for that. Reasoning is necessary, you are asking that. And surprisingly, there are two segments in CSAT. One is interpersonal skills and the other is decision making. Not asking a single question on that since 4-5 years. Whereas when you become an IAS or IPS officer, basically, what you have to do is, you have to take decisions. You have to communicate with the public. You are not asking questions on that. You are not asking a single question. Whereas earlier
there used to be 10 questions. From 10 came to 9, came to 8. After that, since 4-5 years, it is zero. So I guess
have to look at it with a bit of focus. Their Mains
is generally fine at this moment. Just a little bit
of objectivity of evaluation, moderation, scaling between all subjects, between mediums. I think that in terms of scaling, they are a little weak, between mediums. It would be good if that is done. May not benefit someone but should not harm anyone, that's the basic sentiment. Interview is so subjective. At the interview level I don't know why they are not able to do that. Either there is a problem of resources or the policy is paralyzed. You think about it. The children who are selected this time. I know about 70-80 children who are selected. There are some panels. Two interview panels were such. I will not name them. All those who went there, their lives were destroyed. Because that is the same sadism. I don't know what it is. Have their own frustrations. They don't give the kids marks. You imagine, there are 6-7 panels of interviews in UPSC. One of the panels is such in which a kid is getting average marks of 170. If a good child goes there, imagine he scores 190. If the same child
goes to another room by mistake, he will come back with 150. The difference of 40 marks in UPSC means the difference
of at least 400 ranks. There are 10-10 ranks
on each number in UPSC. It is so subjective. I will say it again, they try, they do meetings. The average of all the panels is almost the same. Where is the only difference? In the deviation. In one board, everyone is getting 160, 180, 160, 180, 170, 170. In the other, are getting 130, 210, 125, 205, are getting the same average. But if you go to any board, you cannot go above 170. In some, you get a scope of 200 plus. In some, there is a risk of coming to 130. So, I often think, if UPSC, well those people don't ask me. I want the government to ask me sometime, if they ask. What I am understanding here, is that, there exists a very huge -human factor here.
-Yes, yes. It is a simple solution. You are taking an interview of 275 marks. You can do three of 100 each. Get the interview done in three panels. There is a problem of resources, bring some more members. Increase the time. Do anything. This is the future of the country, the future of some child. Just to save some resources, you will make a person IAS who will trouble you
for the next 35 years. Instead, you better take three interviews. Or bring AI in one interview. Bring an AI bot. Which can replace the interviewers. -It can happen in the future.
-Boom. No, no. I am just joking. I respect every interviewer a lot. I also respect sadism, in some ways. I understand. The pain you have in your heart, you basically
are throwing that pain at the students. -But sorry.
-No. It is not that the members are intentionally giving low scores. This thing sits in their minds, like when you were studying in school, some teacher's marking pattern would be quite liberal, some will have a tough one. Those who were happy in life, theirs will be liberal. That is also a possibility. It is a possible explanation. It is possible, are happy in life. But have seen in his childhood that the best answer only gets 6 out of 10 marks. So his brain's benchmark is made of 6, he never goes over 6. Another person may not be very happy in life but the benchmark in his mind is made of 8, he goes up to 8. It is so subjective that how much to explain to UPSC members to bring it at par. The right solution to this is that instead of 1 interview, do 2-3. So, at least the scope of subjectivity will be reduced. It can be done in essay. There is a lot of subjectivity in essay. So maybe this paper can be evaluated by two examiners separately. Do something like this. I am feeling very relaxed after talking to you. Your energy is like this. Maybe that is why you have such a big fan following. Could be. When you enter a room, you enter with peace. -Maybe.
-How was your childhood, sir? Just like a child should have, exactly like that. You were just like this? No, no. I was very naughty. Very notorious. See, there is a saying. Every monk has a past. Should be mindful of that as well. No one is a born monk. 'Sadhu' is a big word, I can't say it for myself. The one who has not been naughty in his childhood he cannot be peaceful. That is why I believe that the children who are very simple are not children. A kid should be such, that he makes life difficult for his parents, teachers. I was just like that. Very notorious, notorious means, not in a negative sense. But to do indiscipline as much as children do. To do like that. Adventurous. To fight as well. And on the same level, to stand on the stage in front of 2000 children, do debating. I fought the school election, I won. To create an atmosphere
in the entire school of this kind. To do election campaigning. Go to each class and talk to the children. To become a hero in the school. To become a zero sometimes, even that, all the things. To get beaten up by the teacher. To crouch like a chicken a thousand times. Even did all that. Received awards
in front of thousands of children, this too many times, it has been a very diverse, very interesting childhood. Did you do anything wrong in life? A lot of things, -a lot of things
-What was the biggest mistake? I have never made a list like this. Once in school life, it happened that I had a fight with a boy, and then I took 15-20 friends and gave him a royal beating. So, you can say organized hooliganism, for the first time, I did it in the 7th-8th grade. Where was this, you are talking about? In Haryana, there was a city Bhiwani. I lived there. Then I was also beaten as much after coming home, when the news reached home. So, those things would happen. But any such mistake that would be regretful, I don't see that many. Did you meet that boy? -After that?
-No, no. Not after that. No? Maybe, he is watching your podcast. Might be watching. Watching you video with anger, he had beaten up, but after watching the podcast, he is feeling better. I would like to ask
a very strange question. I know this. But I'm trying to know
what's in your heart. Why do you get so many views, according to you? So many people demanded to bring you on the podcast. Well, I don't have an idea about it. Many people wanted. We scan the comment section a lot. And whenever we see someone's name, we make an Excel sheet. And in that sheet, your name is mentioned most frequently. -Fine.
-Always. Why? Why, according to you? So much love? My videos that are on YouTube are generally quite long videos. Are on philosophy, are on constitution. So there is such a group who did not get a chance to learn about these subjects in school and college and it feels very good to learn it, I meet many such people, they message me. Second, there are many of my classes which are on YouTube, there's a lot of laughter and fun in them, so, while laughing if some important thing comes in between, its Reels got made, there are thousand such channels that make Reels, I do not know who are they, then what happens by that is, when children watch
that Reel again and again, then AI works, in all these apps, if you watch once, it will keep coming in front
of you again and again. So, I think this may be the reason. Maybe some people get peace out of it. I really don't know what to answer to this question. Why there is so much popularity, I don't know, I really don't know. I feel that any good public speaker has a lot of empathy. You also have a lot of empathy. By teaching so many students and learning about their hearts. But my heart says that your heart has broken at some point in your life. No? Not at all? I am not saying it romantically. That way, hearts do break. Everyone has a heart break. Means life has broken your heart. Not romantically. Yes, that way, there are 2-3 incidents. Are big incidents. What was the biggest character development incident? If I have to say this, when I was 17 years old, I had come to the DU. I had come to DU. At the age of 16.5 I had come to DU. I was 17, 17.25, when I was in BA first year. A big tragedy took place at our house. Not someone's death. But that kind of tragedy happened. In simple language, it turned
into a king to commoner situation. So, in the age of 17, when I was enjoying my life, I had everything that a kid needs to live in Delhi. I was going to buy a bike at that time. I couldn't buy it. But my friends had bikes. At that time, suddenly it happened so, that all these things got over at home. Then to support my parents and all I had to do a job as a salesman. So, I spent the rest of my graduation time doing a job as a salesman, I used to sell calculators, then used to sale printing cards, means there was a setup for printing, that had bringing orders, doing printing, supplying, used to do all that. Those 2 years were very tough, it was not very tough that I am working, that's fine, children are flexible, seeing our parents from very good condition suddenly coming to very bad condition, where even survival is a crisis, lots of risk, lots of danger, that was very tough. But I always kept telling my parents, my mother is no more. She deceased 4-5 years ago. She always had the guilt that when it was time
for the kids to build a career, we are 3 brothers, I was 17 at that time, the other brother was 18 plus, the elder brother was 20. So, at the stage where careers are built in all kids, the crisis came exactly at that time. So, I explained
this to my parents many times later that every parent gives facilities, you were also giving. The extent to which the crisis taught us, no books and schools and colleges could have ever taught us. That was the turning point, first turning point in my life, big turning point. Then I understood, even if you lose grip of anything there is no need to be afraid, now I am not afraid. We are a team of 15 to 16 people and we are doing good. But now I don't feel scared of all these things. The second turning point, I can say, came in my life when my mother died 5 years ago. That was a very big emotional setback for me, which I... -It shattered my self-evaluation.
-Means? I used to feel I am a very strong person and I don't get affected much
by these things. But I got affected, affected a a lot. It took me 6-12 months
to become comfortable. For a month or so, I was not able to talk on that issue, I was not able to even speak a sentence. Whereas I didn't accept myself as such. Rest, in the world of work, there are small to big setbacks. 3-4 years ago it happened so, a group of our teachers, except me, everyone left all of a sudden. I felt that it was a big crisis. But got managed easily. We got even better teachers. We also understood that the running of a system is not dependent on an individual, nor should it be so. So, we started developing a systemic approach. -Rather than person oriented.
-Yes. So now we work on a systemic approach. There are 1,500 people. I am one of them. We believe in making the system robust and strong. So, now an individual centric system. Like it happens in bureaucracy it is not individual centric. Our system is exactly like that. So now we are even stronger than before. In this podcast
we first talked about love. Then one more emotional subject came up. Do you know Bassi? A stand-up comic. Anubhav Singh Bassi, I have seen once or twice. I had seen one of his episodes. Maybe the kids dropped the cooler
in the college hostel, it was something like this. It was very interesting. Bassi bhai came to the podcast. I thought will make fun with him. Will crack jokes. The whole podcast became serious. About men's emotional health. So much pain was vented on that podcast. From both sides. I feel that often boys do not talk emotionally with each other and this is actually a problem. It is a problem, it is a problem. If you are interested in this, then there was a student of Sigmund Freud, Nancy Chodorow, read her. There is a thesis of hers, it's called 'The Male Inexpressiveness'. Males do not have the capacity of expressing their emotions. It is not that they hide it. Their capacity gets over in childhood. She told a whole story about it. The story told was, when a child is 6-7 years old, you will see that when a child is born, be it is a son or a daughter, sleep snuggled up with the mom. So, he gets a lot of peace
with his mother. He feels that this is his world. Because his mother fulfills all his needs. So, he feels comfort there. He feels good with his father. But it is not a long-term comfort
with father. It's only for a few minutes, it is some time to enjoy, but in long-term involvement, a mother is liked the most. Now 6-7 years, or after the age of 8, what happens is, we start separating the son
from his mother. Sleep in a separate room. Sleep far away. That was the need of every culture, so that no such feelings
come in the son's mind because he is about to grow up. The daughter doesn't face such problems. So mother and daughter can sleep together for whole life and do all kinds of talk because the mother's life experience and the experience the daughter will have after adolescence are going to be similar. So the daughter will only talk to the mother. Even the on will grow young. But the son
will not be able to talk to the mother. There is less talk between son and father. So the creature named son in the house, is very emotionally alone. When he grows up, the things about himself, especially the changes in body, that he feels, he can't talk anything with his father, so what will he talk about this. The mother too maintains a veil with the son in this regard. Doesn't maintain this with the daughter. How to talk such things with a sister. If there is a brother of the same age, then maybe will do, but in very few homes, brothers have a friendly relationship, usually respect prevails there. So a 13-14 year old boy has no option but to talk to his friends. Friends are equally lonely in their respective homes. No one knows what's right. So they steal knowledge from everywhere. Share between them. Make their own gang. Because they don't get that emotional stability from home, don't get support, in these things, so boys-- Mean what Nancy Chodorow is saying, -I am quoting he.
-Yes. So a boy lives in a spirit of rebellion, that my mother detached me from myself, and I can't live
with my mother like my sister does. Detached from the homely world, he seeks solace in the outside world. So you will see that generally, for boys, money, rank, power, big house, big car, hold more value than generally for girls. Because in the home environment, with their mother and father, the amount of peace they get so, for them the meaning of success, is generally different. That successive is seen more in love. That's why you will see in films, when boy and girl meet, what does the girl say? That there should be a small house, you live, I live. The boy usually doesn't say such things. His dream is not a small house. His dream is not just you live, I live. His dream is, there should be a palace, there be 50 servants, 20 cars. Because he wants to prove himself in the outside world. And not all girls, generally, for girls, the point of peace is house, family, group of friends, a small group, where emotions are shared between them, and not define themselves with objects. Its root is that childhood experience when the son is separated from the mother. So, Nancy Chodorow has beautifully written the book, titled, 'The Male Inexpressiveness'. I myself, as a content creator, am trying to find a solution for this through these podcasts. That if two men between them, talk about emotional things, maybe it will have an impact
on the society. Which it has to do. I felt it happened with Bassi bhai. But, 2-3 days ago, I have a friend, who is maybe going to get divorced. So, he was talking to me. And he became very emotional. And I was trying to stay there for him. And the jokes that were coming in my mind, I was blocking them too. Because… Often, you want to crack jokes with your brothers. But, I was listening to him peacefully. This is so difficult, sir. The most difficult thing for men is how to refrain
from laughing on someone's sorrow. That's why if someone dies somewhere, you see what is the behavior of the men and women there. When women go, there are many women sitting there, are talk casually, one more woman comes in, everyone cries together. It exactly works like an orchestra. So, those women who are sitting peacefully and talking, how do all the women
start crying due to one woman, I don't understand. Because how can they have such control
over their emotions? Everyone cried for 5-7 minutes. Then, the 7th woman also became quiet. Then, they started talking. Then, whenever the 8th comes, All the 8 will cry after that. So, I don't know how they manage. Well, you see men there, when they go in someone's sorrow, keeping the hand for 1-2 minutes, A very bad thing happened. Feeling very bad. The one who feels bad, the one who feels sad, will say, yes, no problem, it happens. Then, they will go and sit. You just forget about the tears. The, 6-7 men will sit there, for 2-4 minutes, will look down, and get serious. Then will start gossiping Did the Sensex rise or not. Things going well at the workplace? Or, they get into arrangement. Offering water to everyone, fixing everyone's line of shoes, because they cannot stay in the environment of expressing sorrow. The biggest issue with men is that, their upbringing teaches them that crying is a sign of weakness. If a tear flows out of your eye, you are a girl, not a boy. Being a girl for guys is considered to be
a very demeaning thing. Whereas, it is the power of women that they can cry. It is also a medicine. It is a medicine. -Which we don't have.
-Have stress, cried, end of issue. Firstly, the structure
of our upbringing is wrong. On top of that, this value system that if you cry, you are a girl. Now in the world of boys someone is sad wants to cry everyone makes fun of him, while everyone should support Even if don't cry together, at least provide support. At least give a hug. Crying is become
such a nonsense in the world of boys, so, where will be the treatment? The stress is accumulating. You are unable to cry. So, there is a lot of crisis. There is no less crisis
in the world of men. There is a lot of crisis. Is there a solution? The solution is that in a culture, where crying is considered a good thing. A crying day
should be celebrated once a week. Like it happens, to fast on Tuesday or to fast on Friday, fix one such day for crying. Have to cry today, at least cry for half an hour. That happens with me in meditation. Yes, I have heard that in meditation, many people shed tears. Because you have to face yourself in meditation. Have to face your emotions. I once went to someone's funeral. In someone's family, someone had died and he was my friend. So, when you meet family members at the funeral, I just told him that I am there for you through gestures and he started laughing. In front of his family. That day, I came to know
about the reality of being a man. There are jokes everywhere. No, I used to feel, when my mother died, I felt that I will not be affected. Because I'm exactly the way men are in our country. While reducing emotional expression, are unable to remain emotional
after a while. I was surprised that how my nature changed so much. I couldn't speak for a month. Couldn't get free
from that thing for 6 months It took me a year to get out of that mindset. And I am happy that I was able to at least be so sad on my mother died. That emotions are still intact. It is a matter of happiness. Every son has to go through this time, at some stage. Have to go through, it is better only the son goes through, it is better
the mother doesn't goes through. Means for the mother, to go through this thing, the son is no more, or daughter is no more, that's a bigger thing of grief. So it is better only the son and daughter
suffer this pain, that their mother is no more, their father is no more If you don't mind, as a man, what did you learn from that phase? I learned that… as long as there is a person in life, you should value him more. Because after death, no matter how much you value him, it serves no purpose. I used to also respect my mother a lot. And we also had a lot of affection
between us. But then I feel, I could have given more time. Could sit for one more hour every day. All this pain is there. And everyone has to experience this pain. As long as there are parents, you will not be able to give much time, because you are busy with your own life. You will provide comforts, will not be able to give time, and the problem with time is also that, the thought process
of that generation, likes, are so different that we 2, 4, 5 minutes later are left with no common point, on what to talk. When we are taking care, they are also taking care of us but now thought and experience and world, the needs are so different, can't talk much, but when they are no longer there feels wish had given more time, this does exist, this… Now I tell everyone only this much if anyone's parents are in any such condition that do as much as possible and also give time later there shouldn't be a regret, something is missing. This guilt is a very deep guilt. I have reached to that phase of life, where I'm feeling that all my family members, my mother, father, paternal uncle and maternal uncle, maternal aunt, all of them, are becoming bit by bit like a child. And I feel the need
to become an Alpha more. This is also a strange phase. The age of 30-40, which you are going to reach now, at this age, creates a stronger case
for taking care of parents. Between 40-50, generally, the time to face their separation arrives. Generally, the average age in our country, according to that. In some cases, it happens a little early, in some, it happens a lot later. But on an average, between 40-50, such a shock occurs. So yes, you have to be more attentive towards them. What happens after reaching this age is, what they had to achieve, more or less they may have achieved. They have reached close to a retired life. Their requirement is not that much, that someone financially supports them, means in the middle class, because generally, they have enough, to make ends meet. It is not a big issue in many homes. They can get some friends of their age, if can create such an atmosphere and sit and talk with them for at least 10 minutes to half an hour a day. If possible, an emotional chat. Which used to not be easy
in the earlier generations. Now, the new generations, are able to talk
more emotionally with their parents. So, now, in the new generations, the emotional gap has reduced, kids are more expressive. I see that parents are becoming friends of their children more than ever before. Which is good. But how much they can be friendly, they won't be able to be friends, because the children
won't want to make friends. So why would they make? But even if they can be friendly, then it is better that-- I think after 30 years from now, when I... maybe I don't have 30 left, only 20-25 of mine must have been left. Do you really believe this? In my childhood, someone told me that you will survive up to 77 years old. Now I don't know how much truth it holds. But I'm going to be 50. So, it's settled in my mind that I will die at the age of 77. It has settled. It may be fully wrong. What's guaranteed tomorrow as well? -This is called bleak in philosophy.
-What? Bleak, bleak means something which has no cognitive evidential base but once it has settled in the mind, in which you treat as a fact and you decide about something on that basis. So, I assume, I'll survive till the age of 77, so I plan according
to how many years are left. Possibly I may die tomorrow itself. What’s the guarantee? There's no guarantee. But yes, my guess is that anyway India's average age is the same, so why should I believe that I will get more than that? So bleak is like, I have a bleak, to stay up to close to 77, 25-22 years are left now. So according to that, then I will take decisions
for the rest of my life. Weird question, ever think about things
like karma, reincarnation? I have read a lot on these. Meaning these are my favorite topics. Soul, reincarnation, karma. I think of all of them. I can talk at length on these topics, in which you may be interested in, up to the level you may be. I am interested till the very end level. So ask what you want to ask. I believe
that there are two duties in life. One is your material duty which is different for every human being and its end should be same
for every human being and that is public interest, society. All right. The second duty is spiritual growth. Which you get a little
because of being a good person. You get a little more by remembering God. And you get the most from the study
of spirituality and meditation. I believe this. Because spirituality
was introduced in my life 'because of Autobiography of a Yogi'. Which is the book
of Yogananda Paramahansa. I know, I know. These are the philosophies of Kriya Yoga. Life has taught me that if you genuinely put intention in your work that this work is for the people or this work is for healing, God takes care of you too, I believe this. So with just these two philosophies I am moving ahead in my life. And my hope
is that by taking early retirement, I can fully engage
in social work and meditation. That's why maybe
I don't want a political career. Because I know
that option is coming in my life. Business options will keep coming. At some point
I am going to take a step back and only going to remember the one above. Because as much as I've read from books, I definitely believe, that there are things
like Moksha, Nirvana. We will keep coming in this world until we get ultimate spiritual progress. And I would love if even God wants this to be my last birth in this world And I will try with full force that this should actually be my last birth because I know how much force is inside me that I have made all this. But if I take out that force
from the material world and put the whole force
in the spiritual world, I think it will keep me happy
in the long term. That's the thought process. So this is my opinion. What is your opinion, sir. This has 2-3 points in it. One is about the spiritual journey
you spoke. What happens is, when we grow up, our thought process changes. That's why if a small child
does not do mischief, then he is living against
his self-religion. That's why kids doing mischief
is very important. Being naughty is very important. And the more mischievous he is, the more potential he has. Generally, you can also assume that. Then what happens is, many philosophers and in India's Purushartha system, there is a very deep thing that 25 years of celibacy
is mentioned in that, 25 to 50 householder, then forest dwelling, then renunciation. Many people over a long period of time must have thoughtfully designed
this system. There was a philosopher
named Kierkegaard in Germany, about 100 years before Hegel. No. Sorry was in Hegel's time. And because Hegel was very popular, Hegel was a rationalist who said very crazy things that people didn't understand. He said something deep that there are phases in life, in the beginning you run after pleasures, run blindly that I want to eat this, drink this, want sex,
want this, want that. All these things attract
a lot for some time. But when you come out of it, if not you guilt, you at least feel that why did you go so crazy behind it. Slowly you move towards moral life then you start getting bored
of moral life too. Then you move towards spiritual life. A poet said this same thing
very beautifully My son is now 16-17 years old, he is 16.5 years old, his favorite poem, he keeps telling me
a lot of poems these days. Obsession is different in every age. Obsession is different in every age Toys, lover, status, and god. So, your days with toys are over, About lover you are saying that you have already had a breakup. Not once. Well happened too many times. Multiple breakups. You already have status. So it's just God, it's straightforward that now,
only that thing is left in your mind. Abraham Maslow
has explained this in a standard way that needs change in our life and you are talking exactly what he said. In the beginning
there are physiological needs, hunger, sleep, if you do not get enough sleep for 2 days, you will never think of meditation. If sleep is sound, stomach is full then you can think about meditation. If the stomach is empty then meditation will never happen that time. Then there is need for safety. You are here, three people are standing around
with knives, meditation will not come to mind at all, safety is needed first. So, the physiological is fulfilled, the safety is fulfilled, then love is needed in life. Love is not exactly, love with the opposite sex is needed. It can be of parents also, it can be of friends too, even that is needed. That's why you will see people are so much career oriented
in their 20's or 30's that they forget friends. Because they are focused
on the need of safety. And as soon as are safe, remember friends again, where are you guys, let's sit. Because they want love. Want friendship. After love comes esteem, respect, status. Which you got very soon, many people do not get it for a long time. Someone gets it late. When you have got respect, you have also got love, there is also safety, the stomach is full, then the need that arises is called self-actualization. Which is called 'Swadharma'
in the language of Gita. Now I want to do what I was born to do. And this usually comes in social touches. Like added Vanaprastha in the tradition. That earn till 50, set up a family. After 50,
think that now 20-25 years are left, 30 years are left. How much will you do for yourself? From the society which you took, give back to it. Vanaprastha means that while living in the family, going through the process of detachment. That I am in the world, I am in the family, I will maintain relationships, but now more of my energy and time will be spent on the society. Will be spent for the society. Abraham Maslow is calling the same thing self-actualization. It is not necessarily a society. If someone is born
with a passion for painting, let him paint. You will be free from the fact if money will come or not? The theme film 3 Idiots had, run after your talent, will automatically get success. Practice music. Want to go into academics, study. Write a novel, write a diary,
do something. Abraham Maslow
later again revised his system and said that there is one more need, some have a sixth need, which is happening with you. That is self-transcendence. Self-transcendence means being free from yourself. Being away from yourself. Which we call spirituality. And spirituality, be very careful about. Spiritualism and spirituality
are not one thing. There is a very big misunderstanding. Spiritualism is a word from the West. It is coming from spirit. And what is the spirit in Christianity? It is trinity. God the Father, God the Son, and the Spirit, Holy Spirit. God the Father is God, God the Son is Jesus. And the Holy Spirit is that consciousness which every human being has to bring. The basic meaning of spiritualism is connecting your spirit
with the Holy Spirit. So that is basically a religious belief in Christianity. Spiritualism is not that.
It is 'Adhi-Atma'. The meaning of Atma in one sense, is 'I'. In one sense it is soul. Adhi means greater than that. It is a journey
from self to a greater level. That journey can also be from the society. Why would I only think about myself now? I will think about the society. I will think about the country. That is as good as spirituality. But in that itself comes the next level, why should I not become one
with this whole nature? And why only the whole nature, why not become one beyond that? That is why you will see that the spiritual people world over, who are mystics, live in mysticism, some of them when they go to that level, they see God
in every particle of the world. Some find the world meaningless. They feel that God is inside them, not in the world. Kabirdasa wrote a couplet, 'Moko Kahan Dhoondhe Re Bande Main Toh Tere Pass Mein Na Mai Deval Na Main Masjid Na Kabe Kailash Mein' when god and him became one, as he says, where are you searching me, I'm inside you. I am neither in the temple, nor in the mosque, nor in the Kaaba, nor in Kailash, I am nowhere. But for some, every particle of the world feels like God is everywhere. Then what does he say, what Kabir is saying, 'Lali Mere Lal Ki Jid Dekhu Tit Lal, Lali Dekhan Me Chali, Mein Bhi Ho Gayi Lal'. God's redness is visible
in every particle of the world. So, introvertive, extrovertive which mysticism, you will go in, it is a matter of chance. But after one level those who believe in God deeply they feel this need that how do I connect with him now. This is a kind of spiritualism which you feel passionately. As far as I'm concerned, I can't feel the same way about God. I don't have much of that feeling in me, I'm an agnostic. I believe that this world is made by God, it may or may not be so. It could also be, it got made on its own, made in the process of evolution. I definitely think that there are more chances that there is some force behind all this. But that force is not exactly like people believe in religions. There is no scope for that to happen. Because when all religions were born Generally, you will see,
in 6th century BC, almost most religions were born. Whether we talk about Buddhism. Jainism is old, but Mahavira was born at that time. Confucianism happened in 6th century BC Taoism, from the same time in China. Christianity happened
almost around 600 years later. Judaism is a little earlier than that, is seen something around 6th century BC. Islam as an organized religion, happened quite late, although they believe that their religion
runs from the time of Adam The development of religions, the cognitive development in humans when we first started thinking, There is a process
of several billion years of evolution. It is a process
of around 1,400 million years. In which the first thinking species
of ours came into existence, the process of thinking
started just 70,000 years ago. Just for 70,000 years,
we've been thinking. Before that had no ability to think. The brain was not like that. Since the last 2,500 years philosophy has been going on. Means even in the initial
67,500 years of thinking there is no philosophy. When the stomach started to fill, the neolithic evolution happened, agriculture started happening, settlements started happening, many people, for the first time, got the opportunity to think a lot. Then they thought how all this would have been made. They imagined that God must have made it. They imagined after a long time. Interestingly, in Indian tradition, the first of the 10 avatars of Vishnu is the Matsya avatar, of a fish in water. Evolutionism is saying, that it started with water. In the West in 6th century BC the first philosopher was born named Thales. Some people call him Thales. What is he saying, that the world is made of water. It is called holism,
that the world is made of water. What I am trying to say is that all these philosophies are heavily influenced by the experiences of this world. While the truth is that in the whole universe, if I consider this whole wall as the universe, then our earth, what do I say? Even a mosquito divided by 100 will become that much part. Divide by a 1,000. From the experiences of a few
thousand years of such a small earth, we have made big theories. that Bhagwan, Allah, God. And you will see in the Bible in Christianity it is believed that God created the Earth for Adam. The Bible
holds that the Earth is at the center, that the Sun revolves around. Now it is proved, Copernicus proved that no sun is in center, the Earth is revolving. So, the grounds on which all the religions stand, those grounds are very weak, are friable. Because they are made only on the basis
of the experience of human beings. And in this universe our world means one-hundredth,
one-thousandth part of a mosquito. Who knows in how many galaxies how many worlds exist. Some ahead of us, some behind us. It may be that some are now living in the age of monkeys. Some may have gone ahead of us
by 1,000, 2,000, 1 million years. Even interaction between these worlds
is not getting established. We call them alien, they must be calling us alien. So till now science has not understood
anything of the world even in decimal. From now itself we interpret that this is God who did like this. There is a possibility. To be an agnostic means that I accept there stands a possibility
of God existing. But in the religions of our world, in the philosophies, the interpretation of God is of a very basic level. Interpretations have been made
keeping the earth at the center. Interpretations made
by keeping in mind our country, keeping in mind our society. I think that whenever the ultimate reality will come in front of us, it will probably not come in our life, maybe it will not come
even for 10-20 thousand years, maybe it will come in front
after 1 lakh years. It will not be like the way we think. It will be quite different than that. Why are we here? I don't have the answer to this question. And my answer is only that, that even I don't know why we are here. So let us celebrate and enjoy that we do not know why we are here. With this question
I have studied spirituality. No, that is fine. This is a basic question, that why are we here? But there is a premise in this that you are assuming that everything
happens for a reason in the world. Why should we believe this premise? Because cause-effect relationship, causal relationship, that everything happens for a reason. It is inductive in itself. Inductive means we have found it on the basis of experience. There is no such proof that we can prove
on ontological level, metaphysical level that causation is the reason for everything. This is going to be applied beyond
our human world too. There is no such guarantee. In quantum physics, we see these days that there are some things where the principle of causation
is shaking. How interesting is this. Now see,
the one who got the Nobel Prize this year the physics related, have got for quantum physics. What did they prove? Proved the reverse
of what Einstein proved. Einstein proved that the light that we see is not only a wave it can also be a particle which he called a photon. During Einstein's time an experiment took place and Einstein was shaken but he rejected it. He said that God doesn't throw dices, Means he doesn't play dices, he works with the system. Two experiments were done which Einstein rejected. Now the Nobel Prize has been given to those who revised those experiments. What are those experiments saying? A theory has come in quantum physics, double entanglement which Einstein had rejected. Which says that it may happen that suppose here is a particle of this mic, quantum means subatomic neutron, proton, electron that level of studies, it may be that this particle is entangled with a particle of another galaxy. And the meaning of entangled is if it moves slightly then at the exact same time it will move in reverse. Einstein believed that nothing can be faster
than speed of light which is 3 lakh km per second. What is happening in this is that, there is some movement here, there is movement there and the gap between them can also be 500 million light years, even then both are moving together. If there is such a connection, then it means that the matter
of the speed of light is over. Means something even more than light… Is either faster or we can't even think how fast it is. More than the speed of the mind and we do not consider the mind as a physical object in that sense. Then the ray of light when the double-slit experiment was used, it was seen that it behaves differently when it is seen and when it is not seen. If you did the experiment, it is called the double-slit experiment, it is divided into two parts. So if you see then maybe its behavior becomes that of a particle. If you don't see it, it becomes that of a wave. As soon as an instrument
to observe is placed, the behavior changes. This means that what you think is physical is not so physical either. That is, by being observed, someone observes us, our behavior changes, it is understandable, but if the behavior of the particle of light changes by observing, it means physical and conscious, matter and consciousness, the dichotomy we believe, that both are different, maybe even that is not so. If the reality is changing
because the perceiver is watching, then Shankaracharya was probably right. There was a scientist named Schrodinger who stood against Einstein
in quantum physics, Followed the Tatvamasi principle of Indian philosophy from the Upanishads. Wrote a lot on it. In quantum physics, there will be no bigger scholar
than him in the world. That's why there are so many secrets that I do not think that there will be a final decision
in our lifetime, but whenever it happens, it will be very interesting. What did Shankaracharya say? Shankaracharya is saying that, if I explain you in simple language, that there are three levels of reality. The lowest level is 'Pratibhaas', when you are dreaming in your sleep, it is 'Pratibhaas', you are in a dream, your feel the dream to be very real. A lion is seen in the dream, you are scared, you are sweating, you are running, you are panting, you are falling, you are getting hurt, you are bleeding, everything is happening. And you're just living the moment. Woke up suddenly. And as soon as woke up, realized that it was all a lie. This the world of behavior that we're sitting in. Now, Shankar is saying that the interesting thing is that there is a world beyond it. As soon as you come out of a dream, you understand that everything was a lie in the dream. It was being created by consciousness. It was not real. The lion of the dream, the table in the dream seemed physical. But as soon as you come out of the dream, you understand that the table
was made by consciousness. It was not of wood. It seemed like wood, but it was not of wood. It was made out of thought. Now sitting here, this is a chair, this is a mic, everything is physical. It is possible that one day, we reach the third level which Shankaracharya calls 'Parmarthik Stir' Pratibhasika, Vyavaharika, Paramarthika. Moment you reach there, realize, even this was a lie. That is why he says that there are three levels of truth. And until it is refuted, we feel it is true. As soon as it is refuted, and refuting means, going to the next level. The next level is the level of Brahma. And going there it is understood that the reality we were perceiving was just perception. And in philosophy, many people believe that what we perceive is the reality and it is created
by our perception itself. There is nothing real as such. Reality is what we construct. This is also being said
by Hegel in the West In the West, even Kant… Kant is saying to the extent
that this cup here, We can't even know there is such a cup We can only perceive. And what we perceive is all the same. That is phenomena, that is not noumena. Noumena is the ultimate reality. The cup in itself is noumena. The cup how we perceive is phenomena. So we have many limitations. As much as we claim
to understand this world, we do not even understand
a bagful of the world. And beyond the world
to understand God is a big deal. I feel that we are too young and it's not fair
to claim to understand it. It's okay to try to understand, and that try will not succeed at this age, agreeing to that... And take comfort in the fact that it's okay, we're trying, if it doesn't happen, it doesn't happen. Why worry about it. What cannot be known, in that case, this comfort is enough that I tried to gain knowledge. And I didn't accept any lie
without knowledge. When the whole world was running after following one thing, I at least stopped, will not believe it until there is reliable information. I at least stopped. Here until I feel that thing myself… Haven't felt it, haven't known it, why accept it till then. Today I felt that why do you have
such a big fan following. I'm good at talking. No one has spoken so deeply on this podcast, with such clarity. Do you think people want to listen
to such things nowadays? Yes, surprisingly. Because when I-- I just started my own channel
a few days ago. Last year there was a dispute, some people spread a clip
of one of my videos, in which it seems
that I am insulting Sita Ma, but it was cut in such a way-- It was a part of literature, A lot of disputes took place at that time. Means FIR, etc.,
all those things also happened, so I felt that if ever this happens, at least I should have a platform
of my own. Drishti IAS has a big platform. There are more than 10 million
subscribers in it. But I do not want to fight
my personal fights on that. That is an official channel. So, I started my own channel. By my name, Vikas Divyakirti. I rarely able to upload videos right now. I have uploaded 12 videos until now. But the subscribers on that are somewhere between 22-23 lakh. So when I started, I said, I will talk about philosophy on this. I have only put 4 videos on philosophy. One of which is about Charvaka philosophy. One is, 'What is Ultimate Reality'. One is, what is philosophy? One is an introduction
of Indian philosophy. Fully from Upanishad to Veda
up to Osho Rajneesh I thought who would want to hear
these topics. So, I assumed that maybe
1-2 lakh people would watch it. But surprisingly those videos were watched
by about 50 lakh, 45 lakh people and are demanding to make more videos. I am not getting time since 2 months. I am very busy in classes and all. So maybe in next 1.5 months my batches will be over and then I will restart with the channel. When are you starting? -What?
-The Vikas Divyakirti Show. Means you want me
to start my own podcast? -Yes.
-Yes, then will do it soon. You should do a conversational podcast. Yes, then I will exactly do that. Will do conversation. Where you openly, very expansively, without time limit, you release one episode every week, sir, the whole country will watch it. Time is tight but I will try,
will definitely do. First time I got a suggestion so I will take it seriously. Because for the podcaster, that you will become now, this is a very, at least for me, I am telling from my own perspective, is very evolutionary process. Because you are challenged. Once a week, a good guest will challenge you. Like you challenged me today. This is what I live for. This is the rush of this career. Because you grow
when someone challenges you. Yes that's right. That's it. This was today's podcast. How did you feel, sir? Great, I enjoyed a lot, you? I liked it a lot. The more I say, the less it will be. You have loaded a lot of information
in my mind, sir. So I am lost for words. I just want to say thank you. Most welcome. Most welcome. What I said
at the beginning of this podcast, that wisdom meets compassion. This was the theme of this podcast. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, sir. You are doing a lot for the country too as a thought leader. I wish you all the best and even more, sir. Whatever is in your heart
should all get fulfilled. And even whatever is not in your heart
about spirituality, that too probably should happen with you. Thank you, sir. -Thank you. Thank you so much.
-Lots of love, lots of respect. Thank you. So, this was today's podcast, friends. Tell me how did you feel? Of course,
we will talk a lot with Vikas, sir. But when I get such guests, I myself need a little break, for my own evolution, to live my own life's journey, and after living a little, after learning a little, then I can return to such people. Next time when Vikas, sir comes to Mumbai, you tell us
which topics should be covered. When I go to record that episode, before that will read
this comment section. Tell me very brutally, how can I improve myself as a podcaster and if this is your first TRS podcast because of Vikas, sir, then please, watch the rest of the podcasts too. You will get to learn a lot, I have learned a lot in 4 years and this whole library is free of cost for you. Keep supporting TRS Namaste. Love you. Keep supporting. 🎶[Music]🎶 🎶[Music]🎶 🎶[Music]🎶 